Blog Post on planning and scoping work (#1148)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2020-06-17-on-planning-software-projects.md

Management is interested in projections of how long an initiative will take and
what the final budget will be. Marketing teams might have to schedule campaigns
and book media outlets in order to eventually sell the software and thus have to
know when it will be ready. Product and business experts usually cannot know
what the final shape of a product will be unless they have something they can
show to users, get feedback on and adapt their vision accordingly. Lastly,
engineering teams struggle to give reliable estimates as they simply cannot
foresee all of an initiative's hidden complexities, dependencies and
consequences upfront.

In this post, I want to analyse a number of typical problems many face. I will
also present techniques that we at simplabs have developed to address and
overcome those problems and reduce uncertainty, risk and frustration in digital
product teams.

<!--break-->

![Strong Collaboration](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-on-planning-software-projects/illustration.png#full@1000-2000)

## The Macro Level

When it comes to planning software projects on the macro level, there's two
extremes – trying to plan everything up-front or accepting the impossibility of

> getting that right and not bothering planning anything at all. While most teams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
getting that right and not bothering to plan anything at all. While most teams
```

will find themselves somewhere in the middle between those two, it's still worth
reviewing them in a bit more detail.

### Over-planning

Historically, in a [waterfall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model)
based world, this technique was widely used. The idea is to plan the entirety of
the project up-front in excessive detail, projecting that plan on to a timeline
and then executing it. Teams following that approach would write long and
detailed specifications that describe all aspects of the project. They would
then break that specification down into a backlog of smaller tasks and assign
effort estimates to those (using e.g.
[story points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_poker)). Based on
previously acquired knowledge about how much work a team can get done in a
defined time (the team's
["velocity"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity_(software_development)>)),
the next step is to extrapolate how long the project will take – _"We can build
the social network for elephants as described in the 587 page long specification

> in 67 weeks and it will cost a total of 1.34 Mio. €"_.

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused by this paragraph, both _planning poker_ and _velocity_ are related to agile methodologies (I think Scrum in particular) and not the Waterfall model which is older and used different estimation methods. In Scrum you don't write the entire backlog at the start, maybe some people do, but it's not what is proposed, it's supposed to be iterative. The Waterfall model wasn't iterative, you would write the entire requirements at the start. Agile methodologies are a response to the Waterfall model, so even if you think it also fails due to over-planning, I'm not sure it's correct to mix the two saying the estimation method of one is used in the other.

Author: That's a very good point, this is indeed confusing – I'll rephrase it (there's no need to introduce these terms here anyway I guess).

Management is interested in projections of how long an initiative will take and
what the final budget will be. Marketing teams might have to schedule campaigns
and book media outlets in order to eventually sell the software and thus have to
know when it will be ready. Product and business experts usually cannot know
what the final shape of a product will be unless they have something they can
show to users, get feedback on and adapt their vision accordingly. Lastly,
engineering teams struggle to give reliable estimates as they simply cannot
oversee all of an initiative's hidden complexities, dependencies and
consequences upfront.

In this post, I want to analyse a number of typical problems many face. I will
also present techniques that we at simplabs have developed to address and
overcome those problems and reduce uncertainty, risk and frustration in digital
product teams.

<!--break-->

![Strong Collaboration](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-on-planning-software-projects/illustration.png#full@1000-2000)

## The Macro Level

When it comes to planning software projects on the macro level, there's two
extremes – trying to plan everything up-front or accepting the impossibility of

> getting that right and not bothering planning anything at all. While most teams

Author: Hm, isn't _"that"_ clearer in the sense that it refers to _"plan everything up-front"_?

> getting that right and not bothering planning anything at all. While most teams

Reviewer 2: I was reading it slightly different, but it definitely works.

based world, this technique was widely used. The idea is to plan the entirety of
the project up-front in excessive detail, projecting that plan on to a timeline
and then executing it. Teams following that approach would write long and
detailed specifications that describe all aspects of the project. They would
then break that specification down into a backlog of smaller tasks and assign
effort estimates to those (using e.g.
[story points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planning_poker)). Based on
previously acquired knowledge about how much work a team can get done in a
defined time (the team's
["velocity"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Velocity_(software_development)>)),
the next step is to extrapolate how long the project will take – _"We can build
the social network for elephants as described in the 587 page long specification
in 67 weeks and it will cost a total of 1.34 Mio. €"_.

As we all know now this almost never works as planned, deadlines are missed and
budgets overrun –
[as countless examples show](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_failed_and_overbudget_custom_software_projects).

### Under-planning

> The opposite of that approach is doing no or only very little up-front planning

Reviewer 3: `no or` sounds off
```suggestion
The opposite of that approach is doing little or no up-front planning
```

Author: Hm, how about

```suggestion
The opposite of that approach is doing only very little or no up-front planning at all
```

?

Reviewer 2: I think it's "doing little to no up-front planning"

and just running off. While that removes a lot of pressure from development
teams (designers and engineers in particular), other stakeholders that have
legitimate needs with regards to predictability and simply insight into a
project's progress are left in the cold. The marketing team will not know when
to book the billboards in the local zoo and the product experts can't set up the
user testing session with a group of sample elephants as they don't know what
features they will be able to test when and whether there will be a coherent set
of functionality ready for use at any time at all.

### An incremental approach doesn't magically fix things

As stated above, no teams (that I have seen at least 🤞) in reality strictly
follow any of these two extremes. The classic waterfall model fortunately is a
thing of the past now and the shortcomings of having a team just run off with no
plan are too obvious for anyone being brave (or stupid) enough to try it. In
fact, developing products iteratively starting with an MVP and incrementally

> improving that is a widely accepted technique now. That way, the scope and thus

Author: I'm not sure that works – I really think I want to say both developing something **iterativelly** (in continuous cycles) as well as **incrementally** (little by little) making it better.

> improving that is a widely accepted technique now. That way, the scope and thus

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it does remove information.

complexity and risk is significantly reduced and each increment is broken down
again into iterations (often referred to as
["sprints"](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)#Sprint>)
– which I think is a horrible term but that's a blog post of its own right) so
that the scope is reduced further per iteration into something much more
manageable.

![MVP and subsequent improvements](/assets/images/posts/2020-06-17-on-planning-software-projects/mvp.png#@900-1800)

> However, in reality simply adopting an iterative process (whether that's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In reality, adopting an iterative process (whether that's
```

[Scrum](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)>), a team's
own interpretation of it or something completely different) will not magically
solve all of the above problems. Teams will still face budget overruns, an
inability to give reliable estimates even given the short time horizon of a two
week iteration. Unforeseen and unplanned-for complexities and challenges will

> still only be uncovered only after a task was started, many tasks will span

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only be uncovered only after a task was started, many tasks will span
```

Author: What I'm trying to say here is that the iterative process doesn't change that and these things are **still** only uncovered later (as they were before).

the problems were moved to.

## The Micro Level

Planning on the micro level of an iteration means scoping, bundling and
estimating concrete, actionable units of work. There are countless names for
these units which depend on the particular process or tool in use but in reality
it doesn't matter whether you call them issues, (user) stories or TODOs, whether
you organize them in trees with several levels of subtasks and/or overarching
epics – what they are is tasks that one or several team members can work on and
complete, ideally in relatively short time (like a few days at most). A bundle
of tasks defines the scope of an iteration which is what we're planning for on
the micro level.

### Isn't a plan just a guess anyway?

There's a very popular quote from the team behind
[Basecamp](https://basecamp.com), a bootstrapped company that built a hugely
successful project management SaaS with the same name:

[_"Planning is guessing."_](https://m.signalvnoise.com/planning-is-guessing/)

Basecamp explain the idea in more detail in their bestselling book
[_"Rework"_](https://basecamp.com/books/rework). The quote is both great and

> widely mis-understood. What it means is that anything beyond a pretty small

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
widely misunderstood. What it means is that anything beyond a pretty small
```

> scope is inherently not planable and any plan anyone makes up for it, is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scope is inherently not plannable and any plan anyone makes up for it, is
```

essentially nothing more than a guess. As explained above that is very much true
at the macro level where scope and complexity are way too big for anyone to be
able to fully grasp. What the quote does not mean however, is that you can never

> preparation and pre–assessment of work when the scope is limited – which is the

Reviewer 2: I think the "is that you can never preparation and pre-assessment" sentence is incomplete?

Author: Indeed, the sentence is wrong:

```suggestion
prepare and pre–assess any work when the scope is limited – which is the
```

fact on the micro level of an iteration.

> Yet, many project teams use _"planning is guessing"_ as an excuse to refuse to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yet, many project teams use _"planning is guessing"_ as an excuse to refuse
```

doing any thorough up-front analysis or preparation of tasks at all. Even if
teams spend time on preparing work before starting it, that preparation is often
superficial and does not go deep enough, leaving a lot of uncertainty and risk
to be uncovered only after work on a task has started. While it is true that
understanding any task fully and in its entirety would require actively working
on and in fact completing the task, it is very well possible to analyze it to
uncover hidden complexity, dependencies and implications – not only from an
engineering perspective but also from the perspectives of other stakeholders
like design, product, marketing etc.

> Doing so will help understanding the scope of a particular task, identifying

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Doing so will help in understanding the scope of a particular task, identifying
```

dependent work that needs to be done before or in consequence or weighing
alternative implementation options against each other as well as against other
priorities. All that reduces the uncertainty that is associated with the task
and even while you won't be able to fully eliminate all uncertainty, eliminating
a big part or maybe most of it significantly improves the reliability of
estimates and minimizes unplanned work that is usually necessary when running
into unforeseen complications only after work has started.

## ~Planning~ Preparation

In order to improve planning on the micro level, it is essential to conduct
thorough preparation. I will present four key techniques that are essential for
effective preparation of tasks and that simplabs has been practicing
successfully for years.

### 1. The source of tasks

First, let's look at where the work that a product team conducts typically

> originates. In most cases, there are more or less only two sources – feature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
originates from. In most cases, there are more or less only two sources – feature
```

stories that are defined by the product team and technical changes like
refactorings driven by the engineering team. Ideally both kinds of work are
equally represented as tasks although in many cases that is not the case for
purely technical work. Since that work happens anyway though, not representing
it as individual tasks is a big mistake and leads to part of the work that is
happening not being visible to all stakeholders with all of the negative
consequences that comes with.

So let's assume **all** work that is happening in a project is equally

> represented as tasks. Still, in many cases each stakeholder would only define
> their own tasks without receiving much input from other. Each stakeholder then

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
represented as tasks. Still, in many cases stakeholders would only define
their own tasks without receiving much input from each other. Each stakeholder then
```

pushes for their tasks to be planned for in a particular iteration. That is not
an effective way of collaborating though and generally not in the best interest
of the success of the project. A successful project needs to take all of the
stakeholder's individual perspectives and priorities into account. After all,

> neither focussing on features only and giving up technical aspects like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
neither focusing on features only and giving up technical aspects like
```

long-term maintainability and extensibility of the product, nor refactoring the
code to perfection but only shipping too little too late, will result in a
success for the business.

#### Communication 💬 and Collaboration 🤝

Successful teams communicate open and directly and collaborate closely. While
this might read like an obvious statement, in reality there is often lots of
room for improvement. Many teams build walls between stakeholders when they
really would all have to collaborate – from product experts to engineering and
design but also marketing, finance and potentially others. That collaboration
starts with agreeing what work should be done in which order and to what level
of depth. Having a collaborative process for this in place makes the entire
development process more effective by eliminating unnecessary complexity or

> preventing longer term declines of a team's velocity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
preventing longer-term decline of a team's velocity.
```

In many cases for example, there will be different ways to implement a
particular feature that the product experts want to add with drastically
different levels of associated development complexity. Often, it might not
matter much from a product perspective which of these alternatives is chosen and
finding that out early can save the designers and engineers a substantial amount
of time and effort. In other cases, the engineering team might see the necessity
for particular refactorings but there might be conflicting commitments that the
marketing team has to fulfill which justify delaying the refactoring to a later

> iteration. In other cases again, a refactoring might have substantial positive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iteration. In other cases yet, a refactoring might have substantial positive
```

The iteration lead role is not fixed to a particular member of the product team
but set up as a rotating role among the **entire** team instead – every other
iteration the role moves on to a new team member so that every product or
marketing expert, designer or engineer will assume it periodically. Rotating the
role among the entire team is a great way to ensure people get to understand and
appreciate each stakeholder's perspective and are not stuck with their own point
of view only. That appreciation is not only beneficial for the team spirit but
also significantly improves collaboration in our experience. We do not even work
with project managers at all and depend on the iteration lead role instead. In
fact, we see the project manager role – at least in its classic shape as someone
directing the product team – as an organizational anti-pattern that is most
often necessary only as a consequence of teams that are really dysfunctional at
their core.

### 2. Focussing on the present

As described above, many teams will prepare and maintain an extensive backlog
filled with all tasks that anyone ever brought up or that are expected to

> eventually being required for a particular project. What seems like a good idea

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
eventually be required for a particular project. What seems like a good idea
```

Actively keeping a backlog is most often simply a waste of time. That is not
only the case for feature tasks but also for bug reports – a bug that has not
been addressed for the past six months is unlikely to be addressed in the coming
six months. At the same time it also is unlikely to be really relevant to anyone
and thus unlikely to ever be solved at all (unless it is solved automatically as
a consequence of a change to the underlying functionality maybe).

### 3. Scoping and analysis

Once work has been sourced from the project stakeholders, it needs to be well
understood and scoped. This is a critical step in order to fully understand the
tasks in their entirety and preventing the team from running into unforeseen
problems once the work has started. Of course, it is not possible to always
prevent all problems that might occur at a later point altogether but the more
that is uncovered and addressed earlier rather than later, the smoother
completing each task will go.

First, all of a task's preconditions must be met before it can be worked on at
all. That can include designs being ready or user tests having been conducted

> and analysed. It might also mean contracts with external providers having been
> signed or marketing campaigns having been booked. Just as important as the

Reviewer 3: The usage of having here sounds a bit off, thoughts?
```suggestion
and analysed. It might also mean contracts with external providers have been
signed or marketing campaigns have been booked. Just as important as the
```

are not only written for the team member that will work on them but also for any
other stakeholder that has an interest in the project and needs to know what is
going on at any time – be it at the time the task is actively planned or being
worked on or later when trying to understand why something was done
retroactively, what the intentions and considerations were at the time etc.

## Conclusion

Teams are not successful because they adopt a particular process (and
potentially even get themselves certified) or adopt the latest and greatest
project management tools. Success is mostly enabled through relatively simple
values:

- open and direct communication as well as close collaboration among **all**
  stakeholders
- identifying and resolving as much uncertainty and uncovering as much hidden
  complexity as possible on the task level **before** work on the task starts
- **ignoring** all work that is not known to be relevant at the time an
  iteration is planned and executed
- being **detailed** (potentially overly detailed) when describing tasks

While doing all this thoroughly requires a bit of extra time (the iteration lead

> would easily be occupied a few days per week with that in addition to the time
> the respective experts for every topic invest to give their input), that time
> pays off manyfold via much improved effectiveness and the benefits of improved
> certainty and planability.

Reviewer 3: Maybe?
```suggestion
would easily be occupied a few days per week in addition to the time
the respective experts invest for every topic to give their input),
thanks to a much improved effectiveness, the benefits of improved
certainty and planability that time is payed back manyfold. 
```

Author: Hm, I think that changes the meaning slightly and there's a word missing in the end. What about

```suggestion
Doing all this thoroughly requires a bit of extra time (the iteration lead
would easily be occupied a few days per week with that in addition to the time
the respective experts for each topic invest to give their input). However, thanks to much improved effectiveness as well as the benefits of improved certainty and planability, that time
pays off manyfold.
```
